---
layout: post
title: "Comparison of MKS prediction to CPFEM response for Hexagonal Polycrystals"

field_compare_mks_cpfem_e11_v1:
	type: img
	src: "https://farm4.staticflickr.com/3862/15071355547_ba7c7cd027_o.png"
hist_compare_mks_cpfem_e11_v1:
	type: img
	src: "https://farm6.staticflickr.com/5582/15071237800_a19de93d72_o.png"
ori_hex_cal:
	type: img
	src: "https://farm6.staticflickr.com/5560/15257527362_5535d4099c_o.png"
ori_hex_val:
	type: img
	src: "https://farm4.staticflickr.com/3908/15257926485_075ee210fe_o.png"

---
####Noah Paulson, ME graduate student @ GT

####Matthew Priddy, ME graduate student @ GT

## Introduction

The goal of this study is to demonstrate the capability of the MKS to accurately predict e11 strain fields from CPFEM simulations.

## CPFEM Simulations

Crystal Plasticity Finite Element Method (CPFEM) simulations were performed to 0.5% strain amplitude over three cycles. The simulation results used in this study are from the first loading segment.

* Microstructure size: 21 x 21 x 21
* Material: Polycrystalline Titanium, alpha phase
* Microstructure type: orientations randomly assigned to voxels in microstructure
* Element Type: C3D8 (strain value in each voxel averaged over all integration points)

## MKS Prediction

The materials knowledge system (MKS) was used to predict the elastic response of alpha-Ti polycrystalline microstructures. The MKS was calibrated using a set of 200 microstructures and the associated CPFEM strain fields. Validation was performed using a set of 50 microstructures and the associated CPFEM strain fields. 

### Calibration Datasets

Two-hundred Calibration microstructures were generated by randomly assigning voxels orientations selected from a pre-determined list of orientations. These orientations were selected from the phi2 = 0 face of the hexagonal fundamental zone, where 0 <= phi1 <= 2*pi and 0 <= Phi <= pi/2. The selection of this face for calibration is appropriate as the phi2 angle has no effect on elastic properties ***. A relatively small set of 96 orientations were selected in order to increase the proportion of high-contrast (in orientation) voxel pairings in the calibration microstructures.

_The image below shows the orientations selected for microstructures in the calibration data-set_

{% include ContentManager.html content=page.ori_hex_cal %}

### Validation Datasets

Fifty Validation microstructures were generated by assigning voxels orientations randomly from the hexagonal-triclinic fundamental zone (0 <= phi1 <= 2*pi, 0 <= Phi <= pi/2, 0 <= phi2 <= pi/3).

_The image below shows orientations assigned to voxels of microstructures in the validation data-set_

{% include ContentManager.html content=page.ori_hex_val %}

## Results

The MKS calibration and subsequent validation were successfully performed.

* Mean Absolute Strain Error (MASE) = 0.102%
* Mean maximum error over all microstructures =  0.529%
* Maximum error in any microstructure = 0.753%
* Mean minimum E11, CPFEM: 0.00462
* Mean minimum E11, MKS: 0.00460
* Average E11, CPFEM: 0.00499
* Average E11, MKS: 0.00499
* Mean maximum E11, CPFEM: 0.00526
* Mean maximum E11, MKS: 0.00525

_The image below shows a comparison of the e11 strain fields between the MKS prediction and the CPFEM result for a single slice of a single validation microstructure_

{% include ContentManager.html content=page.field_compare_mks_cpfem_e11_v1 %}

_The histogram below shows a comparison of the e11 between the MKS prediction and the CPFEM result_

{% include ContentManager.html content=page.hist_compare_mks_cpfem_e11_v1 %}


## Conclusions

The MKS was successfully calibrated and is able to predict the elastic response of random-grain polycrystalline alpha titanium to a high degree of accuracy.

### Next Steps

* Calibrate the MKS to predict the response of realistic alpha-beta titanium microstructures
	* Select appropriate set of microstructures for calibration

### References

* Y.C. Yabansu, D.K. Patel, S.R. Kalidindi _Calibrated localization relationships for elastic response of polycrystalline aggregates_ Acta Materialia 81 (2014) 151-160